# Upgrade from R2023a to R2023b
The R2023b version of Webots introduces a new type of node: the [Pose](../reference/pose.md) node.
It has been introduced to solve an issue regarding scale: until R2023b, solid, robots and devices had a scale parameter.
However, scaling such nodes was the cause of a lot of bugs and inconsistencies.
Moreover, in a lot of cases, it did not make sense to scale such nodes: you could scale down a car but motor's power was not scaled down, for example.

The Pose node resolves all these problems.

Changes breaking the backward compatibility are listed in bold in the [Change Log](../reference/changelog-r2023.md).

## What Changes
### What is the Pose Node

The Pose node is a descendant of [Group](../reference/group.md) and replaces [Transform](../reference/transform.md) as the base node of [Solid](../reference/solid.md) and [Fluid](../reference/fluid.md).
It has exactly the same fields as a [Transform](../reference/transform.md) except the `scale`.
You can see the complete node hierarchy [here](../reference/node-chart.md).

### What is Now the Usefulness of the Transform Node?

The Transform node is still there and can be used to scale visual geometries.

*Note*: a Transform node cannot be inserted in a `bounding object` and cannot contain any `Solid` nodes.

## How to Adapt your Projects
### World Files
A backward compatibility mechanism has been implemented to automatically convert old worlds during loading.
It works as follows:
  - For each `Transform`, it checks whether or not the scale has the default value: `1 1 1`.
  - If it is the case, it replaces the `Transform` with a `Pose`.

Saving the world will save the converted world file.

In several cases, you will need to fix the world by yourself:
  - If a non default scale is used by a `Solid` node or a node derived from `Solid`.
  - If a non default `scale` is present in a `Transform` that is in a forbidden place like a `bounding object` or that have `Solid` children.

### PROTO Files

The backward compatibility mechanism also works for PROTOs.
However, saving the world will have no effect on the PROTOs, which means that they will be converted every time the world is loaded.
To fix that, you can either convert them by hand or use the [convert\_transform\_to\_pose.py](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cyberbotics/webots/master/scripts/converter/convert_transform_to_pose.py) script.

> **Note**: the script has several limitations:
  - It does not support procedural PROTOs.
  - It requires the PROTOs/worlds to be well formatted.
  - It does not convert the parameters of the PROTOs.
